blog post about testing CSI drivers (#16743)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2019-10-15-csi-driver-testing.md

domain socket or as host name plus port (`dns:///my-machine:9000`) for
TCP. `csi-sanity` then uses that endpoint for both node and controller
operations. A separate endpoint for controller operations can be
specified with `-csi.controllerendpoint`. Directories are created in
`/tmp` by default. This can be changed via `-csi.mountdir` and
`-csi.stagingdir`.

Some drivers cannot be deployed such that everything is guaranteed to
run on the same host. In such a case, custom scripts have to be used
to handle directories: they log into the host where the CSI node
controller runs and create or remove the directories there.

For example, the [PMEM-CSI](https://github.com/intel/pmem-csi)
driver manages persistent memory, a local resource that is often not
available on typical development machines. It gets tested by deploying
in a Kubernetes cluster that runs inside QEMU virtual machines with a
deployment .yaml file that explicitly enables connecting to the driver
from remote by forwarding incoming TCP connections with
[`socat`]((https://github.com/intel/pmem-csi/blob/82e6114a7282015cabc0fdcd46c24776bf3876dd/deploy/kubernetes-1.14/pmem-csi-direct-testing.yaml#L221-L229).

> The Kubernetes-CSI example driver also gets tested on Kubernetes this

Author: Or better "CSI hostpath example driver" - there's also an in-tree hostpath driver.

way. Here's how one can replicate that, using
[`csi-driver-host-path`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path) v1.2.0:

```
$ cd csi-driver-host-path
$ git describe --tags HEAD
v1.2.0
$ kubectl get nodes
NAME        STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION
127.0.0.1   Ready    <none>   42m   v1.16.0

$ cat >mkdir_in_pod.sh <<EOF
#!/bin/sh
kubectl exec csi-hostpathplugin-0 -c hostpath -- mktemp -d /tmp/csi-sanity.XXXXXX
EOF

$ cat >rmdir_in_pod.sh <<EOF
#!/bin/sh
kubectl exec csi-hostpathplugin-0 -c hostpath -- rmdir "\$@"
EOF

$ chmod u+x *_in_pod.sh
$ csi-sanity -ginkgo.v \

>              -csi.junitfile junit_sanity.xml \

Author: Except that https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/tree/master/cmd/csi-sanity/README.md doesn't mention it either and just refers to `csi-sanity -h`. Maintenance effort again (and this time it wasn't me who created that README.md!).

I wanted to show-case that the option exists. But as I don't want make the post longer by explaining it I removed the line.

             -csi.createstagingpathcmd ./mkdir_in_pod.sh \
             -csi.createmountpathcmd ./mkdir_in_pod.sh \
             -csi.removestagingpathcmd ./rmdir_in_pod.sh \
             -csi.removemountpathcmd ./rmdir_in_pod.sh

Running Suite: CSI Driver Test Suite
====================================
Random Seed: 1570540138
Will run 72 of 72 specs
...
Controller Service [Controller Server] ControllerGetCapabilities 
  should return appropriate capabilities
  /nvme/gopath/src/github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/pkg/sanity/controller.go:111
STEP: connecting to CSI driver
STEP: creating mount and staging directories
STEP: checking successful response
•
------------------------------
Controller Service [Controller Server] GetCapacity 
  should return capacity (no optional values added)
  /nvme/gopath/src/github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/pkg/sanity/controller.go:149
STEP: reusing connection to CSI driver at dns:///127.0.0.1:30056
STEP: creating mount and staging directories
...
Ran 53 of 72 Specs in 148.206 seconds
SUCCESS! -- 53 Passed | 0 Failed | 0 Pending | 19 Skipped
PASS
```

> 

Reviewer: Can we link (or just refer) to the implementation of the hostpath sanity tests for readers to have something to model after?

Author: These are the tests from https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/tree/master/pkg/sanity, i.e. not some tests that are specific to hostpath.

I added:
* The source code of these tests is in the [`pkg/sanity`
  package](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/tree/master/pkg/sanity).

Some comments:

> * How to determine the external IP address of the node depends on the

Author: Changed into
> In this example, the cluster was brought up with
  `hack/local-up-cluster.sh` and thus runs on the local host (`127.0.0.1`).
  It uses a port allocated by Kubernetes, obtained above with `kubectl get "services/hostpath-service"`.

  cluster. In this example, the cluster was brought up with
  `hack/local-up-cluster.sh` and thus runs on the local host. The
  Kubernetes-CSI CI uses
  [kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/docs/user/quick-start/) and there [a
  Docker
  command](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path/blob/3488dc7f994e33485629b86b69a6f34ebb7ef2d9/release-tools/prow.sh#L850)
  can be used.

> * There's no need to have separate scripts for staging and mount

Author: Fine with me. Removed.

  in the CSI spec, must be created and deleted by the CSI driver while
  the CO is responsible for the parent directory. `csi-sanity` handles
  that by creating a directory and then giving the CSI driver that
  directory path with `/target` appended at the end. Kubernetes [got
  this wrong](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/75535)
  and creates the actual `target_path` directory, so CSI drivers which
  want to work with Kubernetes currently have to be lenient and must
  not fail when that directory already exists.
* The "mount directory" corresponds to
  `NodeStageVolumeRequest.staging_target_path` and really gets created
  by the CO, i.e. `csi-sanity`.

## End-to-end testing

In contrast to `csi-sanity`, end-to-end testing interacts with the CSI
driver through the Kubernetes API, i.e. it simulates operations from a
normal user, like creating a PVC. Support for testing external CSI
drivers [was
added](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/commit/6644db9914379a4a7b3d3487b41b2010f226e4dc#diff-5b2d9461c960bc9b146c4ab3d77bcaa5)
in Kubernetes 1.14.0.

### Installation

For each Kubernetes release, a test tar archive is published. It's not

> listed in the release notes (for example, the ones for

Author: > For each Kubernetes release, a test tar archive is published. It's not
listed in the release notes (for example, the ones for
[1.16](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG-1.16.md#downloads-for-v1161)),
so one has to know that the full URL is
`https://dl.k8s.io/<version>/kubernetes-test-linux-amd64.tar.gz` (like
for
[v1.16.0](https://dl.k8s.io/v1.16.0/kubernetes-test-linux-amd64.tar.gz)).

> listed in the release notes (for example, the ones for

Reviewer 2: Maybe update the examples for v1.17.0?

older release might rely on APIs that were removed in more recent
Kubernetes releases. To avoid problems, it's best to simply use the
`e2e.test` binary that matches the Kubernetes release that is used for
testing.

### Usage

Not all features of a CSI driver can be discovered through the
Kubernetes API. Therefore a configuration file in YAML or JSON format
is needed which describes the driver that is to be tested. That file
is used to populate [the driverDefinition
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/external/external.go#L142-L211)
and [the DriverInfo
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/testdriver.go#L139-L185)
that is embedded inside it. For detailed usage instructions of
individual fields refer to the source code of the `e2e.test` binary.

WARNING: tests are often only run when setting some fields and the
file parser does not warn about unknown fields, so always check that
the file really matches those structs.

Here is an example that tests the
[`csi-driver-host-path`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path):

```

> $ cat >test-driver.yaml <<EOF

Author: It was removed. Fix for documentation pending in https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/86077.

StorageClass:
  FromName: true
SnapshotClass:
  FromName: true
DriverInfo:
  Name: hostpath.csi.k8s.io
  Capabilities:
    block: true
    controllerExpansion: true
    exec: true
    multipods: true
    persistence: true
    pvcDataSource: true
    snapshotDataSource: true
InlineVolumes:
- Attributes: {}
EOF
```

The actual `e2e.test` invocation then enables tests for this driver
with `-storage.testdriver` and selects the storage tests for it with
`-ginkgo.focus`:

```
$ ./e2e.test -ginkgo.v \

>              -ginkgo.focus='External.Storage.*hostpath.csi.k8s.io' \

Author: It's enough to focus on just `External.Storage`. Adding the driver name may be useful when multiple external drivers are enabled - but then one can also just select the driver by using only its `-storage.testdriver`.

I've simplified it.

             -storage.testdriver=test-driver.yaml
Oct  8 17:17:42.230: INFO: The --provider flag is not set. Continuing as if --provider=skeleton had been used.
I1008 17:17:42.230210  648569 e2e.go:92] Starting e2e run "90b9adb0-a3a2-435f-80e0-640742d56104" on Ginkgo node 1
Running Suite: Kubernetes e2e suite
===================================
Random Seed: 1570547861 - Will randomize all specs
Will run 163 of 5060 specs

Oct  8 17:17:42.237: INFO: >>> kubeConfig: /var/run/kubernetes/admin.kubeconfig
Oct  8 17:17:42.241: INFO: Waiting up to 30m0s for all (but 0) nodes to be schedulable
...
------------------------------
SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS
------------------------------
External Storage [Driver: hostpath.csi.k8s.io] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow] 
  should access to two volumes with different volume mode and retain data across pod recreation on the same node
  /workspace/anago-v1.16.0-rc.2.1+2bd9643cee5b3b/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/_output/dockerized/go/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/multivolume.go:191
[BeforeEach] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow]
...
```

If the [`ginkgo`

> command](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/#getting-ginkgo) is installed,

Author: Actually, yes, it seems to be in `kubernetes/test/bin/ginkgo`.

I've extended the unpack instructions above and just use the command here.

then one can also run tests in parallel, except for alpha feature

> tests or those that by design have to be run sequentially:

Author: > With the `ginkgo` command one can also run some tests in parallel.
Alpha feature tests or those that by design have to be run
sequentially then need to be run separately:

...

```
$ ./ginkgo -p -v \
         -focus='External.Storage.*(\[Feature:|\[Disruptive\])' \
         ./e2e.test \
         -- \
         -storage.testdriver=test-driver.yaml
```

```
$ ginkgo -p -v \
         -focus='External.Storage.*hostpath.csi.k8s.io' \
         -skip='\[Feature:|\[Disruptive\]' \
         ./e2e.test \
         -- \
         -storage.testdriver=test-driver.yaml
```

## Getting involved

Both the Kubernetes storage tests and the sanity tests are meant to be
applicable to arbitrary CSI drivers. But perhaps tests are based on
additional assumptions and your driver does not pass the testing
although it complies with the CSI specification. If that happens then
please file issues (links below).

> But these are open source projects which depend on the help of those

Author: Done.

I wanted to stress that filing an issue is no guarantee that someone will solve it.

using them, so once a problem has been acknowledged, a pull request
addressing it will be highly welcome.

The same applies to writing new tests. The following searches in the
issue trackers select issues that have been marked specifically as
something that needs someone's help:
- [csi-test](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+label%3A%22help+wanted%22)

> - [Kubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues?utf8=%E2%9C%93&q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22help+wanted%22+label%3Asig%2Fstorage+)

Reviewer: Some final closing words after this one might be nice.

Author: Suggestions? All I could come up with is:

> Happy testing! May the issues it find be few and easy to fix.

Reviewer: I like that closing a lot. 😄 🚢

Author: It was still stuck in an unsaved editor buffer... now it's in the branch.

---
title: Testing of CSI drivers
date: 2019-10-15
---

**Author:** Patrick Ohly (Intel)

When developing a [Container Storage Interface (CSI)

> driver](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/) is useful to leverage

Author: There's also a missing "it" here - will fix.

> driver](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/) is useful to leverage

Reviewer 2: 🤦 yes!

> driver](https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/) is useful to leverage

Author: Done.

depends on quite a bit of effort for setting up and maintaining a test
suite.

When the goal is to merely run the existing tests, then there are
simpler approaches. This blog post introduces those.

## Sanity testing

[csi-test
sanity](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/tree/master/pkg/sanity)
ensures that a CSI driver conforms to the CSI specification by calling
the gRPC methods in various ways and checking that the outcome is as
required. Despite
its current hosting under the Kubernetes-CSI organization, it is
completely independent of Kubernetes. Tests connect to a running CSI
driver through its Unix domain socket, so although the tests are
written in Go, the driver itself can be implemented in any language.

The main
[README.md](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/blob/master/pkg/sanity/README.md)
explains how to include those tests into an existing Go test
suite. The simpler alternative is to just invoke the [csi-sanity](
https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/tree/master/cmd/csi-sanity)
command.

### Installation

Starting with csi-test v3.0.0, the `csi-sanity` command can be built
with `go get github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/cmd/csi-sanity` and

> then can be found in `$GOPATH/bin/csi-sanity`.

Author: Done.

```

Each `e2e.test` binary contains tests that match the features
available in the corresponding release. In particular, the `[Feature:
xyz]` tags change between releases: they separate tests of alpha
features from tests of non-alpha features. Also, the tests from an
older release might rely on APIs that were removed in more recent
Kubernetes releases. To avoid problems, it's best to simply use the
`e2e.test` binary that matches the Kubernetes release that is used for
testing.

### Usage

Not all features of a CSI driver can be discovered through the
Kubernetes API. Therefore a configuration file in YAML or JSON format
is needed which describes the driver that is to be tested. That file
is used to populate [the driverDefinition
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/external/external.go#L142-L211)
and [the DriverInfo
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/testdriver.go#L139-L185)
that is embedded inside it. For detailed usage instructions of
individual fields refer to the source code of the `e2e.test` binary.

> WARNING: tests are often only run when setting some fields and the

Author: Done.

file parser does not warn about unknown fields, so always check that
the file really matches those structs.

Here is an example that tests the
[`csi-driver-host-path`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path):

```
$ cat >test-driver.yaml <<EOF
StorageClass:

>   FromName: true

Reviewer 3: What about the alternative and when/how should I use it?
It would be helpful to clarify

Author: Looks like we are going in circles here :cry: I had that in the original text and @msau42 wanted me to make the blog post shorter.

Let's keep it as is, which means you'll have to follow the links and read the documentation for each field. There you'll find:
https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2bd9643cee5b3b3a5ecbd3af49d09018f0773c77/test/e2e/storage/external/external.go#L168-L170

Reviewer 3: okay, then maybe just make sure there's a link or some reasonable way for finding that comment block.

Reviewer 4: I preferred the blog post to give a simple example, and then point to the documentation that explains in more detail all of the fields.

You can add a summary like "at a minimum, you need to define the storageclass and snapshotclasses you want to use in the test, the name of your driver, and what capabilities you want to test"

Author: > point to the documentation that explains in more detail all of the fields

@koreno : that's what the `DriverInfo` and `driverDefinition` links are for. If they aren't sufficient, we need to enhance them; this blog post isn't the right place for providing documentation.

@msau42: I added your summary. I left out "snapshotclass" because it's optional.

Random Seed: 1570547861 - Will randomize all specs
Will run 163 of 5060 specs

Oct  8 17:17:42.237: INFO: >>> kubeConfig: /var/run/kubernetes/admin.kubeconfig
Oct  8 17:17:42.241: INFO: Waiting up to 30m0s for all (but 0) nodes to be schedulable
...
------------------------------
SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS
------------------------------
External Storage [Driver: hostpath.csi.k8s.io] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow] 
  should access to two volumes with different volume mode and retain data across pod recreation on the same node
  /workspace/anago-v1.16.0-rc.2.1+2bd9643cee5b3b/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/_output/dockerized/go/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/multivolume.go:191
[BeforeEach] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow]
...
```

With the `ginkgo` command one can also run some tests in parallel.
Alpha feature tests or those that by design have to be run
sequentially then need to be run separately:

```
$ ./ginkgo -p -v \
         -focus='External.Storage' \
         -skip='\[Feature:|\[Disruptive\]' \
         ./e2e.test \
         -- \
         -storage.testdriver=test-driver.yaml

> $ ./ginkgo -p -v \

Reviewer: Doesn't this has has to go without `-p` since it's executing the not-to-be-parallelized feature and disruptive tests?

Author: Good catch. Fixed.

  tar --strip-components=3 -zxf - kubernetes/test/bin/e2e.test kubernetes/test/bin/ginkgo
```

Each `e2e.test` binary contains tests that match the features
available in the corresponding release. In particular, the `[Feature:
xyz]` tags change between releases: they separate tests of alpha
features from tests of non-alpha features. Also, the tests from an
older release might rely on APIs that were removed in more recent
Kubernetes releases. To avoid problems, it's best to simply use the
`e2e.test` binary that matches the Kubernetes release that is used for
testing.

### Usage

Not all features of a CSI driver can be discovered through the
Kubernetes API. Therefore a configuration file in YAML or JSON format
is needed which describes the driver that is to be tested. That file
is used to populate [the driverDefinition
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/external/external.go#L142-L211)
and [the DriverInfo
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/testdriver.go#L139-L185)
that is embedded inside it. For detailed usage instructions of

> individual fields refer to the source code of the `e2e.test` binary.

Reviewer 4: link to the source code?

Running Suite: Kubernetes e2e suite
===================================
Random Seed: 1570547861 - Will randomize all specs
Will run 163 of 5060 specs

Oct  8 17:17:42.237: INFO: >>> kubeConfig: /var/run/kubernetes/admin.kubeconfig
Oct  8 17:17:42.241: INFO: Waiting up to 30m0s for all (but 0) nodes to be schedulable
...
------------------------------
SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS
------------------------------
External Storage [Driver: hostpath.csi.k8s.io] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow] 
  should access to two volumes with different volume mode and retain data across pod recreation on the same node
  /workspace/anago-v1.16.0-rc.2.1+2bd9643cee5b3b/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/_output/dockerized/go/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/multivolume.go:191
[BeforeEach] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow]
...
```

With the `ginkgo` command one can also run some tests in parallel.
Alpha feature tests or those that by design have to be run
sequentially then need to be run separately:

```
$ ./ginkgo -p -v \
         -focus='External.Storage' \

>          -skip='\[Feature:|\[Disruptive\]' \

Reviewer 4: skip should also include "[Serial]"

Author: Fixed.

specification that might have been overlooked otherwise.

An earlier blog post about [end-to-end
testing](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/03/22/kubernetes-end-to-end-testing-for-everyone/)
already showed how to use the [Kubernetes storage
tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/e2e/storage/testsuites)
for testing of a third-party CSI driver. That
approach makes sense when the goal to also add custom E2E tests, but
depends on quite a bit of effort for setting up and maintaining a test
suite.

When the goal is to merely run the existing tests, then there are
simpler approaches. This blog post introduces those.

## Sanity testing

[csi-test
sanity](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/tree/master/pkg/sanity)
ensures that a CSI driver conforms to the CSI specification by calling
the gRPC methods in various ways and checking that the outcome is as
required. Despite
its current hosting under the Kubernetes-CSI organization, it is
completely independent of Kubernetes. Tests connect to a running CSI
driver through its Unix domain socket, so although the tests are
written in Go, the driver itself can be implemented in any language.

The main

> [README.md](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/blob/master/pkg/sanity/README.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[README](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/blob/master/pkg/sanity/README.md)
```

domain socket or as host name plus port (`dns:///my-machine:9000`) for
TCP. `csi-sanity` then uses that endpoint for both node and controller
operations. A separate endpoint for controller operations can be
specified with `-csi.controllerendpoint`. Directories are created in
`/tmp` by default. This can be changed via `-csi.mountdir` and
`-csi.stagingdir`.

Some drivers cannot be deployed such that everything is guaranteed to
run on the same host. In such a case, custom scripts have to be used
to handle directories: they log into the host where the CSI node
controller runs and create or remove the directories there.

For example, during CI testing the [CSI hostpath example
driver](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path) gets
deployed on a real Kubernetes cluster before invoking `csi-sanity` and then
`csi-sanity` connects to it through port forwarding provided by
[`socat`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path/blob/v1.2.0/deploy/kubernetes-1.16/hostpath/csi-hostpath-testing.yaml).
[Scripts](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path/blob/v1.2.0/release-tools/prow.sh#L808-L859)
are used to create and remove the directories.

> Here's how one can replicate that, using the v1.2.0 release:

Reviewer 2: v1.2.0 of Kubernetes? Is it worth being super clear here, in case a small number of readers get confused?

> ```

Reviewer 2: In the main documentation it's usual to [separate commands from their output](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#separate-commands-from-output). Whilst that's not required for blog posts, you might want to adopt the same style.

  can be used.
* The create script must print the final directory. Using a
  unique directory for each test case has the advantage that if
  something goes wrong in one test case, others still start with a
  clean slate.
* The "staging directory", aka `NodePublishVolumeRequest.target_path`
  in the CSI spec, must be created and deleted by the CSI driver while
  the CO is responsible for the parent directory. `csi-sanity` handles
  that by creating a directory and then giving the CSI driver that
  directory path with `/target` appended at the end. Kubernetes [got
  this wrong](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/75535)
  and creates the actual `target_path` directory, so CSI drivers which
  want to work with Kubernetes currently have to be lenient and must
  not fail when that directory already exists.
* The "mount directory" corresponds to
  `NodeStageVolumeRequest.staging_target_path` and really gets created
  by the CO, i.e. `csi-sanity`.

## End-to-end testing

In contrast to `csi-sanity`, end-to-end testing interacts with the CSI
driver through the Kubernetes API, i.e. it simulates operations from a

> normal user, like creating a PVC. Support for testing external CSI

Reviewer 2: In case readers aren't up to speed on Kubernetes storage concepts, how about:
```suggestion
normal user, like creating a PersistentVolumeClaim. Support for testing external CSI
```

> drivers [was

Reviewer 2: nit: I'd have the link text be _added_ (move “was” out of the link)

`e2e.test` binary is completely self-contained, so one can "install"
it and the [`ginkgo` test runner](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/) with:

```
curl --location https://dl.k8s.io/v1.16.0/kubernetes-test-linux-amd64.tar.gz | \
  tar --strip-components=3 -zxf - kubernetes/test/bin/e2e.test kubernetes/test/bin/ginkgo
```

Each `e2e.test` binary contains tests that match the features
available in the corresponding release. In particular, the `[Feature:
xyz]` tags change between releases: they separate tests of alpha
features from tests of non-alpha features. Also, the tests from an
older release might rely on APIs that were removed in more recent
Kubernetes releases. To avoid problems, it's best to simply use the
`e2e.test` binary that matches the Kubernetes release that is used for
testing.

### Usage

Not all features of a CSI driver can be discovered through the
Kubernetes API. Therefore a configuration file in YAML or JSON format
is needed which describes the driver that is to be tested. That file
is used to populate [the driverDefinition

> struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/external/external.go#L142-L211)

Reviewer 2: Update these links for v1.17?

and [the DriverInfo
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/testdriver.go#L139-L185)
that is embedded inside it. For detailed usage instructions of
individual fields refer to these structs.

A word of warning: tests are often only run when setting some fields and the
file parser does not warn about unknown fields, so always check that
the file really matches those structs.

Here is an example that tests the
[`csi-driver-host-path`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path):

> ```

Reviewer 2: Optionally: mark this as YAML and remove the first / last lines, then name the file in the text.
(In documentation, we'd make the file downloadable using a `{{< codenew >}}` shortcode).

Reason for marking as YAML is that it's more aesthetic and therefore approachable.
An alternative: remove the initial `$ ` and mark it as Bourne-flavored shell.

$ cat >test-driver.yaml <<EOF
StorageClass:
  FromName: true
SnapshotClass:
  FromName: true
DriverInfo:
  Name: hostpath.csi.k8s.io
  Capabilities:
    block: true
    controllerExpansion: true
    exec: true
    multipods: true
    persistence: true
    pvcDataSource: true
    snapshotDataSource: true
InlineVolumes:
- Attributes: {}
EOF
```

At a minimum, you need to define the storage class you want to use in
the test, the name of your driver, and what capabilities you want to
test.
As with `csi-sanity`, the driver has to be running in the cluster
before testing it.
The actual `e2e.test` invocation then enables tests for this driver
with `-storage.testdriver` and selects the storage tests for it with
`-ginkgo.focus`:

```

> $ ./e2e.test -ginkgo.v \

Reviewer 2: In the main documentation it's usual to [separate commands from their output](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#separate-commands-from-output). Whilst that's not required for blog posts, you might want to adopt the same style.

             -storage.testdriver=test-driver.yaml
Oct  8 17:17:42.230: INFO: The --provider flag is not set. Continuing as if --provider=skeleton had been used.
I1008 17:17:42.230210  648569 e2e.go:92] Starting e2e run "90b9adb0-a3a2-435f-80e0-640742d56104" on Ginkgo node 1
Running Suite: Kubernetes e2e suite
===================================
Random Seed: 1570547861 - Will randomize all specs
Will run 163 of 5060 specs

Oct  8 17:17:42.237: INFO: >>> kubeConfig: /var/run/kubernetes/admin.kubeconfig
Oct  8 17:17:42.241: INFO: Waiting up to 30m0s for all (but 0) nodes to be schedulable
...
------------------------------
SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS
------------------------------
External Storage [Driver: hostpath.csi.k8s.io] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow] 
  should access to two volumes with different volume mode and retain data across pod recreation on the same node
  /workspace/anago-v1.16.0-rc.2.1+2bd9643cee5b3b/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/_output/dockerized/go/src/k8s.io/kubernetes/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/multivolume.go:191
[BeforeEach] [Testpattern: Dynamic PV (filesystem volmode)] multiVolume [Slow]
...
```

> With the `ginkgo` command one can also run some tests in parallel.

Reviewer 2: Maybe:
```suggestion
You can use `ginkgo` to run some kinds of test in parallel.
```

---
title: Testing of CSI drivers
date: 2019-10-15
---

**Author:** Patrick Ohly (Intel)

An earlier blog post about [end-to-end
testing](https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/03/22/kubernetes-end-to-end-testing-for-everyone/)
already showed how to use the [Kubernetes storage
tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/master/test/e2e/storage/testsuites)
for testing of a third-party [Container Storage Interface (CSI)
driver](https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec). That
approach makes sense when the goal to also add custom E2E tests, but
depends on quite a bit of effort for setting up and maintaining a test
suite.

When the goal is to merely run the existing tests, then there are
simpler approaches. This blog post introduces those.

## Sanity testing

[csi-test
sanity](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-test/tree/master/pkg/sanity)

> ensure that a CSI driver conforms to the CSI specification. Despite

Reviewer 4: typo: ensures

Author: Fixed.

Kubernetes API. Therefore a configuration file in YAML or JSON format
is needed which describes the driver that is to be tested. That file
is used to populate [the driverDefinition
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/v1.16.0/test/e2e/storage/external/external.go#L142-L211)
and [the DriverInfo
struct](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/2bd9643cee5b3b3a5ecbd3af49d09018f0773c77/test/e2e/storage/testsuites/testdriver.go#L139-L185)
that is embedded inside it. The intention is to make only
backward-compatible changes. But tests are often only run when setting
some fields and the file parser does not warn about unknown fields, so
always check the current content.

Here is an example that tests the
[`csi-driver-host-path`](https://github.com/kubernetes-csi/csi-driver-host-path):

```
$ cat >test-driver.yaml <<EOF
StorageClass:
  FromName: true
SnapshotClass:
  FromName: true
DriverInfo:
  Name: hostpath.csi.k8s.io
  Capabilities:
    block: true
    controllerExpansion: true
    exec: true
    multipods: true
    persistence: true
    pvcDataSource: true
    snapshotDataSource: true
InlineVolumes:
- Attributes: {}
EOF
```

> The `FromName` fields tell the tests to create storage and snapshot

Reviewer 4: Add a note that it creates a StorageClass with no parameters. If you driver needs parameters specified, then it is better to use the FromFile option.

Author: I've removed this entirely and instead refer the reader to the comments in the source code.
